Pie Charts

Welcome to Pie Charts. After watching this video, you'll be able to describe a pie chart with the help of an example. Explore the process of creating a pie chart using Matplotlib. So what is a pie chart? A pie chart is a circular statistical graphic divided into segments to illustrate numerical proportion. For example, here is a pie chart of the Canadian federal election. It represents the partywise percentage of seats won in the House of Commons. Next, let's learn how to create a pie chart with Matplotlib. Now, let's try to visualize the continentwise breakdown of immigration to Canada from our data set df_canada. The first step is to group the data by continent using the continent column, and we use Pandas for this. We call the Pandas group by function on df_canada, and we sum the number of immigrants from the countries that belong to the same continent. Here is the resulting data frame, and let's name it df_continents. The resulting data frame has six rows, each representing a continent, and 35 columns representing the years from 1980 to 2013, plus the cumulative sum of immigration for each continent. Now, we're ready to start creating our pie chart. We start as usual by importing Matplotlib as mpl and its scripting layer, the pyplot interface, as plt. Then we call the plot function on total column of the data frame df_continents, and we set kind = pie to generate a pie chart. Then to complete the figure, we give it a title. Finally, we use the show function to display the figure. And there you have it, a pie chart that depicts each continent's proportion of immigration to Canada from 1980 to 2013. The explode property of a pie chart in Matplotlib allows you to offset one or more slices from the center, highlighting specific sections of the chart. By assigning values to the explode parameter, you can control the degree of separation and emphasize particular segments of the pie. As shown in this pie, the continents where the total is less than 10% are exploded out to be highlighted. A final point about pie charts, there are some strong critics who oppose using pie charts in any condition. They argue that pie charts do not display accurate data consistently. When it comes to depicting data consistently and communicating the point, bar charts perform significantly better. If you are interested in learning about the arguments against pie charts, here's a link to a very interesting article that discusses very clearly the flaws of pie charts. You can also find the link under the video. In this video, you learned that a pie chart is a circular statistical graphic divided into segments to illustrate numerical proportion. The process of creating a pie chart involves involves importing Matplotlib to represent a large set of data over a period of time.

Box Plots

Welcome to Box Plots. After watching this video, you'll be able to describe a box plot with the help of an illustration. Explain how to create box plots using Matplotlib, so what is a box plot? A box plot is a way of statistically representing the distribution of given data through five primary dimensions, minimum is the smallest number in the sorted data. First quartile is the point 25% of the way through the sorted data, in other words, a quarter of the data points are less than this value. Median is the median of the sorted data, third quartile is the point 75% of the way through the sorted data. In other words, three quarters of the data points are less than this value, and maximum is the highest number in the sorted data. Let's see how we can create a box plot with Matplotlib. We first process the data frame df_canada to set the country name as the index and add a column representing the cumulative sum of annual immigration from each country from 1980 to 2013. We want to create a box plot to visualize immigration from Japan to Canada. As with the other tools we've learned, we start by importing matplotlib as mpl and the pyplot interface as plt. Then we create a new data frame on the data about Japan and we exclude the total column using the years variable. Then we transpose the resulting data frame in the correct format to create the box plot. Let's name this new data frame df_japan. Following that, we call the plot function on df_japan and set a kind=box to generate a box plot, then we complete the figure. We give it a title and label the vertical axis appropriately. Finally, we use the show function to display the figure, and there you have it. A box plot that provides a good distribution of Japanese immigration to Canada from 1980 to 2013. From this plot, we can verify that there are no outliers in this data. Also, we can see that the median is closer to the top, indicating more data concentration in the upper half. In this video, you learned that a box plot is a way of statistically representing given data distribution through five main dimensions. The five main dimensions are minimum, first quartile, median, third quartile and maximum. You can create a box plot using Matplotlib.

Scatter Plots

Welcome to Scatter Plots. After watching this video, you'll be able to: describe what is a scatter plot with the help of an example, explore the scatter plot creation process using Matplotlib. What is a scatter plot? A scatter plot is a type of plot that displays values pertaining to typically two variables against each other. Usually, it's a dependent variable that is plotted against an independent variable to determine if any correlation between the two variables exist. For example, here's a scatter plot of income versus education. And by looking at the plotted data, one can conclude that an individual with more years of education is likely to earn a higher income than an individual with fewer years of education. How can we create a scatter plot with matplotlib? We are considering dataframe df_canada, which has country names set as an index and one column is total, which represents the cumulative sum of annual immigration from each country from 1980-2013. Let's say we want to create a scatter plot of the total annual immigration to Canada from 1980-2013. To be able to do that, we first need to create a new dataframe that shows each year and the corresponding total number of immigrants from all countries worldwide as shown here. Let's name this new dataframe as df_total. Then we proceed as usual, we import matplotlib as mpl and its scripting layer, the pyplot interface as plt. We use the plot function on the dataframe df_total, and we set kind=scatter to generate a scatter plot. Unlike the other data visualization tools, we're only passing in the kind parameter was enough to generate the plot. With scatter plots, we also need to pass the variable, which is on the horizontal axis as the x parameter and the variable that is on the vertical axis as the y parameter. In this case, we're passing column year as the x parameter and column total as the y parameter. Then to complete the figure, we give it a title and label its axes appropriately. Finally, we use the show function to display the figure. There you have it. A scatter plot that shows total immigration to Canada from countries all over the world from 1980-2013. The scatter plot clearly depicts an overall rising trend of immigration with time. Consider the use of the color parameter, which we have assigned a value of dark blue. You may like to pick a color of your choice from the available color palettes. For instance, see how the plot is in the color red. You can also use the s parameter to represent any third variable if you want to. Here we have included the total from the African continent to represent the size of each marker over the years. And it is evident that the number of immigrants has increased over these years as the size of the markers in the scatter plot is increasing. In this video, you learned That: a scatter plot displays values pertaining to typically two variables against each other. The process of creating a scatter plot involves importing matplotlib to visualize a large set of data.

Plotting Directly with Matplotlib

Welcome to plotting directly with Matplotlib. After watching this video, you'll be able to explore various functions offered by Matplotlib for data visualization and plotting. Differentiate between data storytelling and data visualization. Matplotlib is a general purpose, comprehensive plotting library that provides a flexible interface for creating a wide range of plots. It's pyplot module offers a convenient way to create and customize plots quickly. Let's start plotting directly with matplotlib. First, we need to import the library. Import matplotlib.pyplot as PLT. Here we're importing pyplot as PLT. We have also imported NumPy as np as numpy arrays are usually used as the data source for plotting and also support mathematical functions. Next, for tabular data, import pandas. Then call the subplot function and create a figure, the Canvas window and the axes. It's the area where the plot appears. The figure axes pair provides greater control over the figure or Canvas. Now name the plot that you want to create on these axes. Let's now call plot function on the axes to display the line plot, we'll create some synthetic data to generate the plot using NumPy years is equal to np.arange and passing 1980. 2014 to a range function will generate a 1D array of numbers 1980-2013 excluding 2014 immigrants equals np.random.randint will generate a 1D array of random integers, between 2,000-10,000 range. Size equals 34, specifies the number of elements in the array. X.plot function will create a line plot. It takes the x and y values as arguments corresponding to the data to be considered for the x-axis and the y-axis. X.plot years immigrants. Finally display the plot using plt.show function and if you want to display this data as a scatter plot called the scatter function on x instead as shown here. X.scatter and past years and immigrants to it. Now let's put a title to the plots. To do so, simply pass the title string to the plt.title function. plt.title immigrants between 1980 to 2013. On both the plots, label the axis with plt.xlabel as years and plt.y label as total immigrants on both axes. You can apply the label entitled directly to the axes as shown here. Axes.set_title and pass the title string. Axes.set_ x-label or y-label. See now the plots have the title and the labels. Now using x-lim and y-lim functions, you can set the limits on the x and y-axis. To improve the readability, you can enable grid lines with grid function and pass it with true, like x.grid, true. Legend function will include the legend to your plot. Notice that the x-axis now starts with 1975 and ends with 2015, and now it shows the grid at the background of the plot. There are various options available to customize the plot. You can customize the plot with line styles, marker styles, and color customization options to achieve the desired visual effects. With marker, select a style to represent data points in your plot, like S for square and 0 for dots. For line plot, the marker is marker size, while in scatter it's just S. Similarly, you select a color and a size for it. With the line style parameter, you can select different line styles, such as solid, dashed, or dotted lines. Notice the use of LOC in the legend parameter to specify the location where the legend is placed on the figure. Let's now use a bar plot to represent the number of immigrants for each year. Ax.bar function creates a bar plot, passing years corresponding to the x-axis and the immigrants to the y-axis. The height of each bar represents the number of immigrants for that year. Ax.hist generates a histogram with bins set to 20. Notice the use of edge color and color parameters to specify the border and bar column of the histogram. Ax.pie will generate a pie on the axis. Here we're plotting a pie for only five years, 1980 to 1984. Colors you are assigned to each pie slice has a list of colors and labels are set is years. Auto PCT displays the percentage of immigrants with one decimal point. Now, let's explore how to display more than one plot on the same figure and specify the number of rows and columns to be created to the subplots function. For instance, let's create a line and scatter plot in one row, plt.subplots and pass one to it. Both the subplot will be sharing the same y-axis as the data in the y-axis is the same, so assign the Sheri parameter as true. Now you have two axes, axs with index zero and axs with index one, and you can plot your plots as you did earlier. Axs0.plot function for the line axs1.scatter for a scatter plot. And see you have created two plots together. Alternatively, we can use the add underscore subplot function. It takes three arguments, first, the number of rows, second, columns and the last is an index of the subplot. You can create different axes on the figure and add subplots as shown here. Ax 1 equals figure.add_subplot 2, 2, 1. This one means the first axes on the two-by-two divided figure. Then on these axes, create the plot like an ax1.plot. Similarly, you can plot all the plots you want on the four axes. Like this. You have all your plots on this figure. Great work. Lastly, let's learn about data storytelling and data visualization. These are two different terms and serve different purposes. Data storytelling is the art of storytelling that involves creating a narrative around the data. It presents a compelling and engaging story. On the other hand, data visualization is an important aspect of data storytelling and evolves, creating informative charts to understand and explore patterns, trends, and relationships within the data. It brings data to life. We recommend reading this article titled data storytelling, the essential data science skill everyone needs on www.forbes.com for more on data storytelling. In this video, you learned that matplotlib is a versatile plotting library that offers a flexible interface for creating various types of plots. Matplotlib pyplot module offers a convenient way to create and customize plots quickly. Data storytelling is the art of storytelling that involves creating a narrative around the data. Data visualization is an important aspect of data storytelling and involves creating, engaging visuals

Summary: Basic and Specialized Visualization Tools
Congratulations! You have completed this module. At this point in the course, you know: 

A pie chart is a circular statistical graphic, divided into segments, to illustrate numerical proportion.

The process of creating a pie chart involves importing Matplotlib to represent a large set of data over a period of time.

A box plot is a way of statistically representing given data distribution through five main dimensions.

The five main dimensions are minimum, first quartile, median, third quartile, and maximum.

You can create a box plot using Matplotlib.

A scatter plot displays values pertaining to typically two variables against each other.

The process of creating a scatter plot involves importing Matplotlib to visualize a large set of data.

Matplotlib is a versatile plotting library that offers a flexible interface for creating various types of plots.

Matplotlib’s Pyplot module offers a convenient way to create and customize plots quickly.

Data Storytelling is the ‘art of storytelling’ that involves creating a narrative around the data.

Data visualization is an important aspect of data storytelling and involves creating engaging visuals.