Welcome to this course about Tools in Data Science. This course is designed for all learners who want to become data scientists. As a data scientist, you will be working with data. This course will provide you knowledge about various tools that you can use to analyze data and derive conclusions. You can also go through the course with or without programming knowledge. A data scientist’s toolkit consists of many tools and in this course, you will explore a variety of them in the following modules: Module 1: Overview of Data Science Tools Module 2: Languages of Data Science Module 3: Libraries, APIs, Datasets, and Models Module 4: Jupyter Project Module 5: RStudio and GitHub Module 6: Final Project - Create a Jupyter Notebook and Module 7 (an optional module): IBM Tools for Data Science Let’s now get some insight into what each module offers. In Module 1, you will learn about the different categories of Data Science tools and examples of Open Source and Commercial offerings in each category. In addition, you will learn how the tools overlap in functionality, and what their pros and cons are. Module 2 will give an overview of the commonly used languages that are available in data science, like Python, R, Scala, Java, Julia, and SQL and what they are used for. In the third module, you will learn about libraries that contain built-in modules providing different functionalities. You will also learn that an application programming interface (API) allows communication between two pieces of software. Further, in the module, you will explore open data sets on the Data Asset eXchange (DAX). Finally, you will learn how Machine learning (ML) uses algorithms – also known as “models” – to identify patterns in the data. In Module 4, you will learn about Project Jupyter - one of the most commonly used environments among data scientists. You will explore the three main applications of Project Jupyter: Jupyter Notebook, JupyterLab, and JupyterLite. In addition, you will be introduced to commercial Jupyter based applications such as IBM Watson Studio, and Google Colab. The module also gives an overview of Jupyter distributions that can be installed on your own system like Anaconda. Module 5 will start with an introduction to R and RStudio. You will learn about the different R visualization packages and how to create visual charts using the plot function. In addition, you will learn about GitHub, a popular version control platform that Data Scientists can use for sharing their projects and showcasing their portfolios. In Module 6, you will work on your final project in which you will create and share your Jupyter Notebook. You will submit your project and also grade your peers. Finally, Module 7 is an optional module that gives an insight into additional IBM tools like Watson Studio and IBM Cloud Pak for data as a service that includes IBM Watson Knowledge Catalog, IBM Watson Machine Learning and more. So, there is a lot to cover here! To get the most from this course, complete viewing each video, complete all hands-on labs, and check your learning with each quiz. We're very happy to have you with us as you start your Tools for Data Science journey. If you have any trouble with any of the course material, please don’t hesitate to contact us in the discussion forum. So, let's get started! And, good luck!

Learning goals for the course

In this course you will be introduced to a Data Scientist's workbench or toolkit that consists of a variety of tools, languages, libraries, APIs, data sets, models, etc. used by Data Scientists. Try not to be overwhelmed by the sheer number of components and tools that exist in the Data Science ecosystem. The main goal of the course is for you to be knowledgeable about the kinds of tools Data Scientists use, their examples, and get some hands-on time with a few key tools. 

As such, you are not required to recall the name of every single tool covered in the course. However, be familiar with the categories or types of tools and 1 or 2 examples each type. Modules 4 and 5 of this course will cover some of the most important ones for a beginner Data Scientist in greater depth and enable you to get hands-on experience with them. As you take additional Data Science courses, you will become more acquainted with some of the other tools and libraries. Some may be required to perform more specialized or advanced Data Science or Machine Learning tasks. So don't try to remember all of the names just now. Pay special attention, though, to Video and Lesson summaries.

To successfully complete the course, you are required to complete the first 6 out of the 7 modules in the course. The 7th module is an optional one.

Here is what you will be learning in each module:

Module 1: Overview of Data Science Tools  

In this module, you will learn about the different types and categories of tools that data scientists use and popular examples of each. You will also become familiar with Open Source,  Cloud-based,  and Commercial options for data science tools.

Describe the components of a Data Scientist's toolkit and list various tool categories

List examples of Open Source, Commercial, and Cloud-based tools in various categories


Module 2: Languages of Data Science  

This module will bring awareness about the criteria determining which language you should learn. You will learn the benefits of Python, R, SQL, and other common languages such as Java, Scala, C++, JavaScript, and Julia. You will explore how you can use these languages in Data Science. You will also look at some sites for more information about the languages. 

Learning Objectives
Identify the criteria and roles for determining the language to learn.

Identify the users and benefits of Python.

Identify the users and uses of the R language.

Define SQL elements and list their benefits.

Review languages such as Java, Scala, C++, JavaScript, and Julia.

List the global communities for connecting with other users.


Module 3: Packages, APIs, Data Sets and Models  

This module will give you in-depth knowledge of different libraries, APIs, dataset sources and models used by data scientist.

Learning Objectives

List examples of the various libraries: scientific, visualization, machine learning, and deep learning.

Define REST API to request and respond.

Describe data sets and sources of data.

Explore open data sets on the Data Asset eXchange.

Describe how to use a learning model to solve a problem.

List the tasks that a data scientist needs to perform to build a model.

Explore ML models in the Model Learning eXchange.


Module 4: Jupyter Notebooks and JupyterLab 

This module introduces the Jupyter Notebook and JupyterLab. You will learn how to work with different kernels and the basic Jupyter architecture. In addition, you will identify the tools in an Anaconda Jupyter environment. Finally, the module overviews cloud-based Jupyter environments and their data science features. 

Learning Objectives

Describe how to use the notebooks in JupyterLab.

Describe how to work in a notebook session.

Describe the basic Jupyter architecture.

Describe how to work with kernels.

Identify tools in Anaconda Jupyter environments.

Describe cloud-based Jupyter environments and their data science features.


Module 5: RStudio and GitHub 

This module will start with an introduction to R and RStudio and will end up with Github usage. You will learn about the different R visualization packages and how to create visual charts using the plot function.

Further in the module, you will develop the essential conceptual and hands-on skills to work with Git and GitHub. You will start with an overview of Git and GitHub, creating a GitHub account and a project repository, adding files, and committing your changes using the web interface. Next, you will become familiar with Git workflows involving branches, pull requests (PRs), and merges. You will also complete a project at the end to apply and demonstrate your newly acquired skills. 

Learning Objectives

Describe R capabilities and RStudio environment.

Use the inbuilt R plot function.

Explain version control and describe the Git and GitHub environment.

Describe the purpose of source repositories and explain how GitHub satisfies the needs of a source repository.

Create a GitHub account and a project repository.

Demonstrate how to edit and upload files in GitHub.

Explain the purpose of branches and how to merge changes.


Module 6: Final Project and Assessment  

In this module, you will work on a final project to demonstrate some of the skills learned in the course. You will also be tested on your knowledge of various components and tools in a Data Scientist's toolkit learned in the previous modules.

Learning Objectives

Create a Jupyter Notebook with markdown and code cells

List examples of languages, libraries and tools used in Data Science

Share your Jupyter Notebook publicly on GitHub

Evaluate notebooks submitted by your peers using the provided rubric

Demonstrate proficiency in Data Science toolkit knowledge


Module7: IBM Watson Studio 

This is as an optional module if you are interested in learning about and working with data science tools from IBM such as  Watson Studio.

Learning Objectives
Find common resources in Watson Studio and IBM Cloud Pak for Data.

Create an IBM Cloud account, service, and project in Watson Studio.

Create and share a Jupyter Notebook.

Use different types of Jupyter Notebook templates and kernels on IBM Watson Studio.

Describe how to connect a Watson Studio account and publish a notebook in GitHub.