How Data Science is saving lives

 Using Data Science techniques to understand and analyze the large data sets available today has a huge impact on human lives. It can provide targeted information to help healthcare professionals give the best treatment to patients, or help predict natural disasters so that people can prepare early, and much more besides. In healthcare, data scientists use predictive analytics developed from data mining, data modeling, statistics, and machine learning to find the best options for patients. This type of predictive analytics examines all known factors for a disease, including gene markers, associated conditions, and environmental factors. It then recommends appropriate tests, suitable trials, and any suggested treatments. Every individual physician has their own store of knowledge gained from their studies, interests, and experiences. Data science systems that use predictive analytics ensure that all physicians can also access the latest information about the disease, tests, and treatment plans, tailored to their specific patient. With this type of system, every physician has access to the same knowledge, and the best options can be consistently offered, improving patient outcomes. For example, a study by the Boston Consulting Group and AdvaMedDx, an industry association of medical diagnostics companies, examined the barriers to the adoption of potentially lifesaving diagnostic tests for patients with a specific cancer and a particular gene marker. The study discovered that the biggest factor in the patient being offered a specific test was the patient’s oncologist, who may or may not have known about the test and its relationship to the gene marker. By providing extra information through data science tools, physicians can be made aware of the most helpful tests and treatments for a specific patient. There are many opportunities to explore other ways to mine data, such as from electronic medical records for different types of medical research. Schools such as the NorthShore University HealthSystem in suburban Chicago, a leader in the implementation of Electronic Medical Records (EMR) systems, now offer guidance on data mining. It is the first healthcare provider in America to be awarded the highest level of EMR deployment for both inpatient and outpatient care. This remarkable effort has generated much-anonymized data available for innovative analytics research. Developing more sophisticated big data analytics capabilities helps healthcare organizations move from basic descriptive analytics towards predictive insights, thanks to data science. In the field of Disaster Preparedness, the ability to save lives using Data Science tools has been under development for many years. The use of predictive analytics tools is improving and providing new data analysis in a multitude of ways, alerting populations to danger faster than ever before. Large, high-quality data sets can be used to predict the occurrence of numerous types of natural disasters, which can be the difference between life and death for thousands of people. Earthquakes, hurricanes & tornados, floods, and volcanic eruptions can be predicted with the help of data science. Recent research at the University of Warwick in the UK used social media content such as photos and keywords to track the development of floods, hurricanes and other weather events. When added to the information recorded by scientists and weather stations, this type of data can be used to improve the predictions for localised weather events. Because the real benefit of this knowledge is so important, schools are starting to include this type of data science education in their curriculum. For instance, the University of Chicago Graham School offers a Master of Science course in Threat and Response Management. Data science tools enable organizations to analyse vast quantities of data from widely different sources, and present that information in a way that allows data scientists to gain new knowledge, in some cases, saving hundreds of lives.

How Should Companies Get Started in Data Science?

At the end of the day, for businesses, they know one thing, that if they are unable to measure something, they are unable to improve it. And if they are unable to measure their costs, they are unable to reduce them. If they're unable to measure their profits, they are unable to increase them. So the first thing a company has to do is to start recording information, start capturing data, data about costs. And the differentiate it by labor costs and material cost, the cost to how much it cost to sell one product and the total cost. And then you look at the revenue, where's your revenue coming from? Is 80% of your revenue coming from 20% of your customers? Or is it the other way around? So first thing first, start capturing data. Once you have data, then you can apply algorithms and analytics to it. So the first thing to do would be to capture data. If you're not capturing it, start capturing it. If you're capturing it, archive it. Do not overwrite on your old data thinking you don't need it anymore. Data never gets old. Data is always relevant, even if it's 100 years old, 200 years old. It is relevant to you and and your firm and your success. So keep data, capture it, archive it, make sure nothing goes to waste. Make sure there's a consistency. So someone 20 years later trying to understand, that data should be able to do so, so have proper documentation. Do it now. Put the best practices for data archiving in place the moment you start a business. And if you're already in business and you haven't done it, do it now. >> Start measuring things. Too many companies haven't measured things properly for a decade and, then they decide, they want data science. Data science inside a company is only going to be as valuable as the data collected. Garbage in, garbage out is a rule in any sort of analysis. >> If something is not measured, it's very difficult to improve it or to change it. So the very first step is measurement. If companies have existing data, then they should start looking at it and cleaning it. If they don't have existing data, then they need to start collecting it. >> I think to look for a team who love to work as a data scientist. >> The first stop is to have employees, that they are interested on data science. because if you don't have interest in your company, you will not have engagement. >> Companies should remember, that it's key to have a team. So it's not one data scientist, but a team of them, that each of them have strengths in different areas of data science.

Applications of Data Science

Data science and big data are making an undeniable impact on businesses, changing day-to-day operations, financial analytics, and especially interactions with customers. It's clear that businesses can gain enormous value from the insights data science can provide. But sometimes it's hard to see exactly how. So let's look at some examples. In this era of big data, almost everyone generates masses of data every day, often without being aware of it. This digital trace reveals the patterns of our online lives. If you have ever searched for or bought a product on a site like Amazon, you'll notice that it starts making recommendations related to your search. This type of system known as a recommendation engine is a common application of data science. Companies like Amazon, Netflix, and Spotify use algorithms to make specific recommendations derived from customer preferences and historical behavior. Personal assistants like Siri on Apple devices use data science to devise answers to the infinite number of questions end users may ask. Google watches your every move in the world, you're online shopping habits, and your social media. Then it analyzes that data to create recommendations for restaurants, bars, shops, and other attractions based on the data collected from your device and your current location. Wearable devices like Fitbits, Apple watches, and Android watches add information about your activity levels, sleep patterns, and heart rate to the data you generate. Now that we know how consumers generate data, let's take a look at how data science is impacting business. In 2011, McKinsey & Company said that data science was going to become the key basis of competition. Supporting new waves of productivity, growth, and innovation. In 2013, UPS announced that it was using data from customers, drivers, and vehicles, in a new route guidance system aimed to save time, money, and fuel. Initiatives like this support the statement that data science will fundamentally change the way businesses compete and operate. How does a firm gain a competitive advantage? Let's take Netflix as an example. Netflix collects and analyzes massive amounts of data from millions of users, including which shows people are watching at what time a day when people pause, rewind, and fast-forward, and which shows directors and actors they search for. Netflix can be confident that a show will be a hit before filming even begins by analyzing users preference for certain directors and acting talent, and discovering which combinations people enjoy. Add this to the success of earlier versions of a show and you have a hit. For example, Netflix knew many of its users had streamed to the work of David Fincher. They also knew that films featuring Robin Wright had always done well, and that the British version of House of Cards was very successful. Netflix knew that significant numbers of people who liked Fincher also liked Wright. All this information combined to suggest that buying the series would be a good investment for the company. They were right. It was a huge hit. Thanks to data science, Netflix knows what people want before they do.

Lesson Summary

In this lesson, you have learned:

Data Science helps physicians provide the best treatment for their patients, and helps meteorologists predict the extent of local weather events, and can even help predict natural disasters like earthquakes and tornadoes.
That companies can start on their data science journey by capturing data. Once they have data, they can begin analysing it.
Some ways that data is generated by consumers. 
How businesses like Netflix, Amazon, UPs, Google, and Apple use the data generated by their consumers and employees.
The purpose of the final deliverable of a Data Science project is to communicate new information and insights from the data analysis to key decision-makers.