Waffle Charts & Word Cloud

Welcome to Waffle Charts and Word Cloud. After watching this video, you'll be able to explore waffle charts with the help of an illustration. Identify the use cases of waffle charts. Explore word cloud with the help of an illustration. Identify the use cases of Word Cloud.
Waffle charts are a visualization technique that represent categorical data in the form of square tiles or cells. These resemble a grid of equal-sized squares, with each square representing a specific value or category. The size or color of the squares indicate the magnitude or proportion of each category. Waffle charts effectively show the proportion or percentage of different categories within an overall composition. The grid-like structure of waffle charts makes it easy to understand and interpret data even for nontechnical audiences. Let's now explore the areas in which you can employ waffle charts. You can use waffle charts for market share analysis, demographic representation, project progress tracking, budget allocation, survey responses, election results, and product sales analysis.
Let's go through each use case. Visualize market share data, showing the proportion of companies or products within a specific market. Display demographic data, such as age groups or ethnicities within a population. Represent completion status of tasks or milestones, providing a visual overview of progress. Demonstrate allocation of budgetary resources across categories or departments within an organization.
Summarize survey responses, displaying the distribution of answers to multiple choice questions. Provide a clear visualization of voting outcomes, representing the distribution of votes for candidates or parties. And lastly, illustrate product sales by representing the distribution of sales across categories or regions.
Furthermore, by using the pywaffle library in Python, you can easily create visually appealing waffle charts to effectively communicate categorical data. You can import Waffle class from the pywaffle library and provide the values parameter with the data containing the four continents with the total immigrants from the Canada immigration data set. The rows and columns parameters determine the size of the chart grid. Lastly, we customize the chart by adding a title and positioning the legend.

Now that we understand waffle charts, let's learn about word cloud. Word cloud, also known as tag cloud or text cloud, is a popular data visualization method to visually present textual data in an engaging and informative manner. It presents a concise summary of the textual content by providing a visual overview of the most commonly used words within a given text or collection of documents. A word cloud is simply a depiction of the importance of different words in a body of text. It works in a simple way, a word appears bigger and bolder in the word cloud depending on how many times it appears in a source of textual data. Here is an example of a text on recruitment. This cloud shows us that phrases like recruitment, talent, candidates, and so on stand out in the document. Let's now explore the areas in which we can employ word cloud. These include social media analysis, customer feedback analysis, content analysis, market research, resume or job description analysis. Let's go through each use case. Word cloud helps extract and visualize popular topics or sentiments from social media conversations or hashtags. Summarize customer reviews or feedback to identify recurring themes or sentiments. It assists in analyzing textual content, such as articles, blogs, or research papers to uncover prevalent keywords or themes. Word cloud helps analyze survey responses, interviews, or focus group transcripts to extract key insights. It also highlights important skills or keywords in resumes or job descriptions to assess their relevance. In this video, you learned that waffle charts are a visualization technique that represent categorical data in the form of square tiles or cells. There are different areas in which you can use waffle charts. Word cloud is a popular data visualization method to visually present textual data in an engaging and informative manner. You can use word cloud in different areas to visually present textual data in an engaging and informative manner. 

Seaborn and Regression Plots

Welcome to Seaborn and regression plots. After watching this video, you'll be able to explain what Seaborn is and what it does, describe the functions of Seaborn. Although Seaborn is another data visualization library, it's based on Matplotlib. Seaborn offers a range of built-in themes and color palettes that improve the visual appeal of your plots with minimal effort. Seaborn makes creating plots very efficient, therefore, with Seaborn, you can generate plots with code that is five times less than with Matplotlib. Seaborn integrates well with statistical libraries such as NumPy and SciPy, allowing you to easily combine statistical analysis with visualizations. It provides specialized plot types such as regression plots, distribution plots, and categorical plots, that are particularly useful for analyzing data and modeling relationships. While Pandas and Matplotlib are powerful tools for data manipulation and basic visualization, Seaborn complements them by providing a higher level interface for creating visually appealing and informative statistical graphics. Seaborn works well, especially when dealing with more complex visualizations and statistical analyses. Let's see how we can use Seaborn to create a statistical graphic. Let's look into regression plots. Let's say we have a data frame called df_total, representing total immigration to Canada from 1980 to 2013. The data frame displays the year in one column and the corresponding total immigration in another. We want to create a scatter plot and a regression line to highlight any trends in the data. With Seaborn, you can do all this with one line of code. We first import Seaborn, and let's import it as SNS, then we call the Seaborn Regplot function. We tell it to use the data frame df_total, and to plot the column year on the horizontal axis and the column total on the vertical axis. The output of this one line of code is a scatter plot with a regression line, and not just that, but also a 95% confidence interval. Seaborn's Regplot function also accepts additional parameters for any personal customization, so you can change the color, for example, using the color parameter. Let's go ahead and change the color to green.

Also, you can change the marker shape as well using the marker parameter. Let's go ahead and change the shape of our markers to a plus marker instead of the default circular marker. Let's try to plot some categorical data. In our Canada immigration data set, there are some categorical features such as country, region, and continent. Why not plot continents for their count in the data set? Using a single line of code, we can create a bar plot representing the count of records for each continent in the data using the counterplot function. The x parameter specifies the categorical variable to be plotted on the x-axis, the country, and the data parameter sets the data set to be used, df_Canada. Though we haven't used all observations from the data set, it's evident from the plot that most of the observations in the data are from Africa. Let's try to plot the Bohr plot on the categorical data from a slice of the df_Canada data set. Here we have plotted the continent by the total column of data. Seaborn has been grouped by the categorical variable continent and plotted the aggregated values of total, with confidence interval. You'll explore more in the lab session on Seaborn. In this video, you learned that Seaborn is a Data Visualization library based on Matplotlib. Seaborn was built primarily to provide a high-level interface for drawing statistical graphics. Scatter Plots and Regression Lines can be created with one line of code using Seaborn. Seaborn's Regplot function accepts additional parameters for personal customization.

