Feedback

Welcome to the Data Science Methodology 101 From Deployment to Feedback - Feedback! Once in play, feedback from the users will help to refine the model and assess it for performance and impact. The value of the model will be dependent on successfully incorporating feedback and making adjustments for as long as the solution is required. Throughout the Data Science Methodology, each step sets the stage for the next. Making the methodology cyclical, ensures refinement at each stage in the game. The feedback process is rooted in the notion that, the more you know, the more that you'll want to know. That's the way John Rollins sees it and hopefully you do too. Once the model is evaluated and the data scientist is confident it'll work, it is deployed and put to the ultimate test: actual, real-time use in the field. So now, let's look at our case study again, to see how the Feedback portion of the methodology is applied. The plan for the feedback stage included these steps: First, the review process would be defined and put into place, with overall responsibility for measuring the results of a "flying to risk" model of the congestive heart failure risk population. Clinical management executives would have overall responsibility for the review process. Second, congestive heart failure patients receiving intervention would be tracked and their re-admission outcomes recorded. Third, the intervention would then be measured to determine how effective it was in reducing re-admissions. For ethical reasons, congestive heart failure patients would not be split into controlled and treatment groups. Instead, readmission rates would be compared before and after the implementation of the model to measure its impact. After the deployment and feedback stages, the impact of the intervention program on re-admission rates would be reviewed after the first year of its implementation. Then the model would be refined, based on all of the data compiled after model implementation and the knowledge gained throughout these stages. Other refinements included: Incorporating information about participation in the intervention program, and possibly refining the model to incorporate detailed pharmaceutical data. If you recall, data collection was initially deferred because the pharmaceutical data was not readily available at the time. But after feedback and practical experience with the model, it might be determined that adding that data could be worth the investment of effort and time. We also have to allow for the possibility that other refinements might present themselves during the feedback stage. Also, the intervention actions and processes would be reviewed and very likely refined as well, based on the experience and knowledge gained through initial deployment and feedback. Finally, the refined model and intervention actions would be redeployed, with the feedback process continued throughout the life of the Intervention program. This is the end of the Feedback portion of this course. Thanks for watching!

Course Summary

Welcome to Data Science Methodology 101 Course Summary! We've come to the end of our story, one that we hope you'll share. You've learned how to think like a data scientist, including taking the steps involved in tackling a data science problem and applying them to interesting, real-world examples. These steps have included: forming a concrete business or research problem, collecting and analyzing data, building a model, and understanding the feedback after model deployment. In this course, you've also learned methodical ways of moving from problem to approach, including the importance of understanding the question, the business goals and objectives, and picking the most effective analytic approach to answer the question and solve the problem. You've also learned methodical ways of working with the data, specifically, determining the data requirements, collecting the appropriate data, understanding the data, and then preparing the data for modeling! You've also learned how to model the data by using the appropriate analytic approach, based on the data requirements and the problem that you were trying to solve Once the approach was selected, you learned the steps involved in evaluating and deploying the model, getting feedback on it, and using that feedback constructively so as to improve the model. Remember that the stages of this methodology are iterative! This means that the model can always be improved for as long as the solution is needed, regardless of whether the improvements come from constructive feedback, or from examining newly available data sources. Using a real case study, you learned how data science methodology can be applied in context, toward successfully achieving the goals that were set out in the business requirements stage. You also saw how the methodology contributed additional value to business units by incorporating data science practices into their daily analysis and reporting functions. The success of this new pilot program that was reviewed in the case study was evident by the fact that physicians were able to deliver better patient care by using new tools to incorporate timely data-driven information into patient care decisions. And finally, you learned, in a nutshell, the true meaning of a methodology! That its purpose is to explain how to look at a problem, work with data in support of solving the problem, and come up with an answer that addresses the root problem. By answering 10 simple questions methodically, we've taught you that a methodology can help you solve not only your data science problems, but also any other problem. Your success within the data science field depends on your ability to apply the right tools, at the right time, in the right order, to the address the right problem. And that is the way John Rollins sees it! We hope you've enjoyed taking the Data Science Methodology course and found it to be a valuable experience one that you'll share with others! And of course, we also hope that you will review and take other Data Science courses in the Data Science Fundamentals Learning Path. Now, if you ready and upto the challenge, please take the final exam. Thanks for watching! 

Lesson Summary


In this lesson, you have learned:    

The importance of stakeholder input.

To consider the scale of deployment.

The importance of incorporating feedback to refine the model.

The refined model must be redeployed.

This process should be repeated as often as necessary.