A. Course Syllabus:
Defining Data Science and What Data Scientists Do
Defining Data Science    

What is Data Science?

Fundamentals of Data Science

The Many Paths to Data Science

Advice for New Data Scientists

Data Science: The Sexiest Job in the 21st Century

What Do Data Scientists Do?
A day in the Life of a Data Scientist

Old problems, new problems, Data Science solutions

Data Science Topics and Algorithms

What is the cloud?

What Makes Someone a Data Scientist?

Data Science Topics   
Foundations of Big Data

How Big Data is Driving Digital Transformation

What is Hadoop?

Data Science Skills & Big Data

Data Scientists at New York University

Data Mining

Quiz: Data Mining

Deep Learning and Machine Learning
What's the difference?

Neural Networks and Deep Learning

Applications of Machine Learning

Regression

Quiz: Regression

Data Science in Business
Applications of Data Science

How Data Science is Saving Lives

How Should Companies Get Started in Data Science?

Applications of Data Science

The Final Deliverable

Quiz: The Final Deliverable

Careers and Recruiting in Data Science
How Can Someone Become a Data Scientist?

Recruiting for Data Science

Careers in Data Science

High School Students and Data Science Careers

The Report Structure
The Report Structure

Quiz: The Report Structure

Final Assignment

B.Professional Certificate Career Support:
Coursera Community and Career Support
As a Data Science learner on Coursera, you have access to networking opportunities in Coursera’s 
Professional Certificate Community
 and 
Data Science
 forums. Talk about what you’re learning, ask questions, find peers to work with on projects, and share your career goals. 

Post-Completion Career Support Services for Professional Certificates
Completing a Professional Certificate on Coursera unlocks access to a private Professional Certificate Alumni Resources community, which provides exclusive career support resources, including:

Step-by-step guide to ensure your success at every stage of your job search.

1 year of free access to Big Interview’s expert video lessons, resume builder, and interactive interview practice tools (a $79/month value).

A network and support of fellow completers of Coursera Professional Certificates.

A variety of special offers such as career coaching, webinars, and more.

After completing your Professional Certificate, you’ll get an email telling you how to access these career support resources. 