A day in the Life of a Data Scientist

I've built a recommendation engine before, as part of a large organization and worked through all types of engineers and accounted for different parts of the problem. It's one of the ones I'm most happy with because ultimately, I came up with a very simple solution that was easy to understand from all levels, from the executives to the engineers and developers. Ultimately, it was just as efficient as something really complex, and they could have spent a lot more time on. Back in the university, we have a problem that we wanted to predict algae blooms. This algae blooms could cause a rise in toxicity of the water and it could cause problems through the water treatment company. We couldn't like predict with our chemical engineering background. So we use artificial neural networks to predict when these blooms will reoccur. So the water treatment companies could better handle this problem. In Toronto, the public transit is operated by Toronto Transit Commission. We call them TTC. It's one of the largest transit authorities in the region, in North America. And one day they contacted me and said, "We have a problem." And I said, "Okay, what's the problem?" They said, "Well, we have complaints data, and we would like to analyze it, and we need your help." I said, "Fine I would be very happy to help." So I said, "How many complaints do you have?" They said, "A few." I said, "How many?" Maybe half a million. I said, "Well, let's start working with it." So I got the data and I started analyzing it. So, basically, they have done a great job of keeping some data in tabular format that was unstructured data. And in that case, tabular data was when the complaint arrived, who received it, what was the type of the complaint, was it resolved, whose fault was it. And the unstructured part of it was the exchange of e-mails and faxes. So, imagine looking at how half a million exchanges of e-mails and trying to get some answers from it. So I started working with it. The first thing I wanted to know is why would people complain and is there a pattern or is there some days when there are more complaints than others? And I had looked at the data and I analyzed it in all different formats, and I couldn't find [what] the impetus for complaints being higher on a certain day and lower on others. And it continued for maybe a month or so. And then, one day I was getting off the bus in Toronto, and I was still thinking about it. And I stepped out without looking on the ground, and I stepped into a puddle, puddle of water. And now, I was sort of ankle deep into water, and it was just one foot wet and the other dry. And I was extremely annoyed. And I was walking back and then it hit me, and I said, "Well, wait a second. Today it rained unexpectedly, and I wasn't prepared for it. That's why I'm wet, and I wasn't looking for it." What if there was a relationship between extreme weather and the type of complaints TTC receives? So I went to the environment Canada's website, and I got data on rain and precipitation, wind and the light. And there, I found something very interesting. The 10 most excessive days for complaints. The 10 days where people complain the most were the days when the weather was bad. It was unexpected rain, an extreme drop in temperature, too much snow, very windy day. So I went back to the TTC's executives and I said, "I've got good news and bad news." And the good news is, I know why people would complain excessively on certain days. I know the reason for it. The bad news is, there's nothing you can do about it. 

Old problems, new problems, Data Science solutions

Organizations can leverage the almost unlimited amount of data now available to them in a growing number of ways. However, all organizations ultimately use data science for the same reason—to discover optimum solutions to existing problems. Let’s take a look at three examples of data science providing innovative solutions for old problems. In transport, Uber collects real-time user data to discover how many drivers are available, if more are needed, and if they should allow a surge charge to attract more drivers. Uber uses data to put the right number of drivers in the right place, at the right time, for a cost the rider is willing to pay. In a different transport related data science effort, the Toronto Transportation Commission has made great strides in solving an old problem with traffic flows, restructuring those flows in and around the city. Using data science tools and analysis, they have: Gathered data to better understand streetcar operations, and identify areas for interventions Analyzed customer complaints data, Used probe data to better understand traffic performance on main routes and created a team to better capitalize on big data for both planning, operations and evaluation By focusing on peak hour clearances and identifying the most congested routes, monthly hours lost for commuters due to traffic congestion dropped from 4.75 hrs. in 2010 to 3 hrs. in mid-2014. In facing issues in our environment, data science can also play a proactive role. Freshwater lakes supply a variety of human and ecological needs, such as providing drinking water and producing food. But lakes across the world are threatened by increasing incidences of harmful cyanobacterial blooms. There are many projects and studies to solve this long-existing dilemma. In the US, a team of scientists from research centers stretching from Maine to South Carolina is developing and deploying high-tech tools to explore cyanobacteria in lakes across the east coast. The team is using robotic boats, buoys, and camera-equipped drones to measure physical, chemical, and biological data in lakes where cyanobacteria are detected, collecting large volumes of data related to the lakes and the development of the harmful blooms. The project is also building new algorithmic models to assess the findings. The information collected will lead to better predictions of when and where cyanobacterial blooms take place, enabling proactive approaches to protect public health in recreational lakes and in those that supply drinking water. Such interdisciplinary training prepares the next generation of scientists to address societal issues with the proper modernized data science tools. It takes gathering a lot of data, cleaning and preparing it, and then analyzing it to gain the insight needed to develop better solutions for today's enterprises. How do you get a better solution that is efficient? You must: Identify the problem and establish a clear understanding of it. Gather the data for analysis. Identify the right tools to use, and develop a data strategy. Case studies are also helpful in customizing a potential solution. Once these conditions exist and available data is extracted, you can develop a machine learning model. It will take time for an organization to refine best practices for data strategy using data science, but the benefits are worth it. 

Data Science Topics and Algorithms

I really enjoy regression. I'd say regression was maybe one of the first concepts that I, that really helped me understand data so I enjoy regression. I really like data visualization. I think it's a key element for people to get across their message to people that don't understand that well what data science is. Artificial neural networks. I'm really passionate about neural networks because we have a lot to learn with nature so when we are trying to mimic our, our brain I think that we can do some applications with this behavior with this biological behavior in algorithms. Data visualization with R. I love to do this. Nearest neighbor. It's the simplest but it just gets the best results so many more times than some overblown, overworked algorithm that's just as likely to overfit as it is to make a good fit. So structured data is more like tabular data things that you’re familiar with in Microsoft Excel format. You've got rows and columns and that's called structured data. Unstructured data is basically data that is coming from mostly from web where it's not tabular. It is not, it's not in rows and columns. It's text. It's sometimes it's video and audio, so you would have to deploy more sophisticated algorithms to extract data. And in fact, a lot of times we take unstructured data and spend a great deal of time and effort to get some structure out of it and then analyze it. So if you have something which fits nicely into tables and columns and rows, go ahead. That's your structured data. But if you see if it's a weblog or if you're trying to get information out of webpages and you've got a gazillion web pages, that's unstructured data that would require a little bit more effort to get information out of it. There are thousands of books written on regression and millions of lectures delivered on regression. And I always feel that they don’t do a good job of explaining regression because they get into data and models and statistical distributions. Let's forget about it. Let me explain regression in the simplest possible terms. If you have ever taken a cab ride, a taxi ride, you understand regression. Here is how it works. The moment you sit in a cab ride, in a cab, you see that there's a fixed amount there. It says $2.50. You, rather the cab, moves or you get off. This is what you owe to the driver the moment you step into a cab. That's a constant. You have to pay that amount if you have stepped into a cab. Then as it starts moving for every meter or hundred meters the fare increases by certain amount. So there's a... there's a fraction, there's a relationship between distance and the amount you would pay above and beyond that constant. And if you're not moving and you're stuck in traffic, then every additional minute you have to pay more. So as the minutes increase, your fare increases. As the distance increases, your fare increases. And while all this is happening you've already paid a base fare which is the constant. This is what regression is. Regression tells you what the base fare is and what is the relationship between time and the fare you have paid, and the distance you have traveled and the fare you've paid. Because in the absence of knowing those relationships, and just knowing how much people traveled for and how much they paid, regression allows you to compute that constant that you didn't know. That it was $2.50, and it would compute the relationship between the fare and and the distance and the fare and the time. That is regression. 

Cloud for Data Science

Cloud is a godsend for data scientists. Primarily because you're able to take [the] your data, take your information and put it in the Cloud, put it in a central storage system. It allows you to bypass the physical limitations of the computers and the systems you're using and it allows you to deploy the analytics and storage capacities of advanced machines that do not necessarily have to be your machine or your company's machine. Cloud allows you not just to store large amounts of data on servers somewhere in California or in Nevada, but it also allows you to deploy very advanced computing algorithms and the ability to do high-performance computing using machines that are not yours. Think of it as you have some information, you can't store it, so you send it to storage space, let's call it Cloud, and the algorithms that you need to use, you don't have them with you. But then on the Cloud, you have those algorithms available. So What you do is you deploy those algorithms on very large datasets and you're able to do it even though your own systems, your own machines, your own computing environments were not allowing you to do so. So Cloud is beautiful. The other thing that Cloud is beautiful for is that it allows multiple entities to work with same data at the same time. You can be working with the same data that your colleagues in say Germany and another team in India and another team in Ghana, they are collectively working and they're able to do so because the information, and the algorithms, and the tools, and the answers, and the results, whatever they needed is available at a central place, which we call Cloud. Cloud is beautiful. Using the Cloud enables you to get instant access to open source technologies like Apache Spark without the need to install and configure them locally. Using the Cloud also gives you access to the most up-to-date tools and libraries without the worry of maintaining them and ensuring that they are up to date. The Cloud is accessible from everywhere and in every time zone. You can use cloud-based technologies from your laptop, from your tablet, and even from your phone, enabling collaboration more easily than ever before. Multiple collaborators or teams can access the data simultaneously, working together on producing a solution. Some big tech companies offer Cloud platforms, allowing you to become familiar with cloud-based technologies in a pre-built environment. IBM offers the IBM Cloud, Amazon offers Amazon Web Services or AWS, and Google offers Google Cloud platform. IBM also provides Skills Network labs or SN labs to learners registered at any of the learning portals on the IBM Developer Skills Network, where you have access to tools like Jupyter Notebooks and Spark clusters so you can create your own data science project and develop solutions. With practice and familiarity, you will discover how the Cloud dramatically enhances productivity for data scientists.

DISCUSSIONS pROMPT :Introduce Yourself
Introduce yourself and share with your peers your background and any experience you have with data science.

Lesson Summary

In this lesson, you have learned:

The typical work day for a Data Scientist varies depending on what type of project they are working on.
Many algorithms are used to bring out insights from data. 
Accessing algorithms, tools, and data through the Cloud enables Data Scientists to stay up-to-date and collaborate easily.