Welcome to the Course

Welcome to the data visualization with Python course. The data visualization with Python course is ideal for professionals with knowledge of Python programming language who aspire to become data analysts. In this course, you'll learn how to create meaningful, effective and aesthetically pleasing data visuals and plots in Python using Matplotlib. You'll explore advanced visualization tools that provide various advanced features and capabilities. In addition, you'll identify different web-based dashboarding tools available in Python. The last module will allow you to act as a data analyst to complete your final lab assignment. The five modules in this course comprehensively cover the concepts related to these areas. In module 1, you will learn about data visualization and best practices for creating plots and visuals, you will discover the history and architecture of Matplotlib. Furthermore, you'll learn about basic plotting with Matplotlib and explore the dataset on Canadian immigration, which you will use during the course. Lastly, you will analyze data in a DataFrame and generate line plots using Matplotlib. In module 2, you will create a diverse range of plots using Matplotlib and the data visualization library. This module will teach you about area plots, histograms, bar charts, pie charts, box plots, and scatter plots. You'll also explore the process of creating these visualization tools using Matplotlib. In module 3, you'll learn about waffle charts and word cloud. You will create regression plots using seaborn, a new visualization library in Python. In addition, you'll learn about folium, a data visualization library that visualizes geospacial data. Furthermore, you'll explore the process of creating maps using folium and superimposing them with markers to make them interesting. Finally, you'll learn how to create a choropleth map using folium. In module 4, you'll explore the benefits of dashboards and identify the different web-based dashboarding tools in Python. You will learn about plotly and discover how to use plotly graph objects and Plotly express to create charts, you will gain insight into dash and open source user interface, Python library and its two components. Finally, you will clearly understand the callback function and determine how to connect core and HTML components using callback. Finally, module 5, primary focus is helping you complete your final lab assignment. Your objective is to track and report on the performance of domestic flights operated by US airlines. The objective is to analyze the reporting airlines performance to improve flight and customer reliability. After completing this course, you can use different visualization libraries in Python, namely Matplotlib, seaborn, and folium, to create expressive visual representations of your data for different purposes. You'll also be able to use basic and advanced visualization tools and identify different web-based dashboarding tools. There is a lot to cover here. To get the most from this course, make sure to view every video, review your knowledge with each quiz, and complete all the hands-on labs. If you have any trouble with the course material, please don't hesitate to contact us and the discussion forum. Thank you for being part of our course We look forward to sharing this valuable knowledge with you

How to Make the Most of this Course

Welcome to Data Visualization with Python. This is a 5-week course, where you can expect to spend approximately 3-5 hours per module.

The content of this course can be applied to multiple Specializations and Professional Certificate Programs:

IBM Data Science Professional Certificate

IBM Data Analyst Professional Certificate

Applied Data Science Specialization

Here are some tips to ensure you get the best experience and gain the required knowledge for a job interview or a certification, or for that matter, to enhance your skills.

Tip 1: Get familiar with the course content

Browse through the module structure to understand the topics and associated assets. Having a better understanding of the module structure will help you navigate through the course easily and also help you to understand the mandatory and optional topics in the module.

Familiarize yourself with the order of topics, which will help you connect the ideas and form a cohesive whole. The outline with the modules and lessons in the course is available later in this topic.

Tip 2: Create your schedule to complete the course

Set a target date when you want to finish the course and schedule time each day to study. Set a reasonable goal for yourself to complete each module.

Tip 3: Be an active learner

Set some time aside for studying the course. Avoid distractions.

When watching instructional videos, make sure to take notes. You can download transcripts and highlight parts of the narration that are important. Alternatively, you can take notes elsewhere.

Keeping yourself engaged is important to learn more and measure your understanding.

Read the readings thoroughly as they help connect the instructional videos and real-life scenarios.

The course contains Expert Viewpoints, which bring out answers to Data Visualization -related questions from experts in the field. Compare what the experts say to what you learned in the instructional videos and readings.

Make sure to review the demo videos and attempt the labs. Reviewing these course materials will help you get used to the different Data Visualization-related activities needed in a Data Visualization role.

Attempt all practice quizzes and read the feedback for correct and incorrect responses. Retake them until you get all of the answers correct.

Complete all of the graded quizzes. If you get a response wrong, you can revisit the topic for review. Review the topic, identify the correct response, and understand why that answer is correct. While there is a minimum passing score, you can retake graded quizzes for a higher score.

Discussion forums are optional. However, actively participating in the discussion forums is recommended. Provide thoughtful responses to the prompts and engage by responding to others’ posts.

Tip 4: Inform your family and friends about course goals

Signing up for the course was the first step. You must make yourself accountable and commit to the course. Inform your family and friends about this commitment. If there are topics where you need a different perspective, get family and friends involved. 

Tip 5: Follow through with your plan

You create a schedule for yourself in Tip 2. Make sure to stay motivated and achieve your set goals. Commit and execute! Be unstoppable and keep yourself motivated!

Syllabus
Module 1: Introduction to Data Visualization Tools

Lesson 1: Introduction to Data Visualization

Module 2: Basic and Specialized Visualization Tools

Lesson 1: Basic Visualization Tools

Lesson 2: Specialized Visualization Tools

Module 3: Advanced Visualizations and Geospatial Data

Lesson 1: Advanced Visualization Tools

Lesson 2: Visualizing Geospatial Data

Module 4: Creating Dashboards with Plotly and Dash

Lesson 1: Creating Dashboards with Plotly and Dash

Module 5: Final Project and Exam

Lesson 1: Final Assessment

Lesson 2: Course Wrap-Up



Syllabus



Abstract 
One of the most important skills of successful data scientists and data analysts is the ability to tell a compelling story by visualizing data and findings in an approachable and stimulating way. In this course you will learn many ways to effectively visualize both small and large-scale data. You will be able to take data that at first glance has little meaning and present that data in a form that conveys insights. 

This course will teach you to work with many Data Visualization tools and techniques. You will learn to create various types of basic and advanced graphs and charts like: Waffle Charts, Area Plots, Histograms, Bar Charts, Pie Charts, Scatter Plots, Word Clouds, Choropleth Maps, and many more! You will also create interactive dashboards that allow even those without any Data Science experience to better understand data and make more effective and informed decisions. 

You will learn hands-on by completing numerous labs and a final project to practice and apply the many aspects and techniques of Data Visualization using Jupyter Notebooks and a Cloud-based IDE. You will use several data visualization libraries in Python, including Matplotlib, Seaborn, Folium, Plotly & Dash.

Course Learning Objectives
After completing this course, a learner will be able to:

Implement data visualization techniques and plots using Python libraries, such as Matplotlib, Seaborn, and Folium to tell a stimulating story.

Create different types of charts and plots such as line, area, histograms, bar, pie, box, scatter, and bubble.

Create advanced visualizations such as waffle charts, word clouds, regression plots, maps with markers, & choropleth maps.

Generate interactive dashboards containing scatter, line, bar, bubble, pie, and sunburst charts using the Dash framework and Plotly library.

Module 1
Title: Introduction to Data Visualization Tools
Description
Data visualization is a way of presenting complex data in a form that is graphical and easy to understand. When analyzing large volumes of data and making data-driven decisions, data visualization is crucial. In this module, you will learn about data visualization and some key best practices to follow when creating plots and visuals. You will discover the history and the architecture of Matplotlib. Furthermore, you will learn about basic plotting with Matplotlib and explore the dataset on Canadian immigration, which you will use during the course. Lastly, you will analyze data in a data frame and generate line plots using Matplotlib.

Objectives
By the end of this week, you will be able to:

Discuss data visualization and its importance

Discover the history of Matplotlib and its architecture

Use Matplotlib to create plots employing Jupyter notebook

Explore the dataset on immigration to Canada

Identify the steps to analyze data in Pandas data frame

Use Matplotlib to create line plots


Activities
Lesson 0: Welcome to the Course

Welcome to the Course

How to Make the Most of this Course

Syllabus

Lesson 1: Introduction to Data Visualization

Overview of Data Visualization

Types of Plots

Plot Libraries

Introduction to Matplotlib

Basic Plotting with Matplotlib

Dataset on Immigration to Canada

Line Plots

Hands-on Lab: Exploring and Pre-processing a Dataset using Pandas

Hands-on Lab: Introduction to Matplotlib and Line Plots

Practice Quiz: Introduction to Data Visualization 

Module 1 Summary: Introduction to Data Visualization Tools

Module 1 Cheat Sheet

Module 1 Graded Quiz: Introduction to Data Visualization Tools

Module 2
Title: Basic and Specialized Visualization Tools
Description
Visualization tools play a crucial role in data analysis and communication. These are essential for extracting insights and presenting information in a concise manner to both technical and non-technical audiences. In this module, you will create a diverse range of plots using Matplotlib, the data visualization library. Throughout this module, you will learn about area plots, histograms, bar charts, pie charts, box plots, and scatter plots. You will also explore the process of creating these visualization tools using Matplotlib.

Objectives
By the end of this week, you will be able to:

Explore an area plot with an illustration and create it using Matplotlib

Define a histogram with an illustration and create it using Matplotlib

Describe a bar chart with an illustration and create it using Matplotlib

Discover a pie chart with an illustration and create it using Matplotlib

Describe a box plot with an illustration and create it using Matplotlib

Discover a scatter plot with an illustration and create it using Matplotlib


Activities
Lesson 1: Basic Visualization Tools

Area Plots

Histograms

Bar Charts

Hands-on Lab: Area Plots, Histograms, and Bar Charts

Practice Quiz: Basic Visualization Tools

Lesson 2: Specialized Visualization Tools

Pie Charts

Box Plots

Scatter Plots

Hands-on Lab: Pie Charts, Box Plots, Scatter Plots, and Bubble Plots

Plotting Directly with Matplotlib

Hands-on Lab: Plotting Directly with Matplotlib

Practice Quiz: Specialized Visualization Tools

Module 2 Summary: Basic and Specialized Visualization Tools

Module 2 Cheat Sheet

Module 2 Graded Quiz: Basic and Specialized Visualization Tools

Module 3
Title: Advanced Visualizations and Geospatial Data
Description
Advanced visualization tools are sophisticated platforms that provide a wide range of advanced features and capabilities. These tools provide an extensive set of options that help create visually appealing and interactive visualizations. In this module, you will learn about waffle charts and word cloud including their application. You will explore Seaborn, a new visualization library in Python, and learn how to create regression plots using it. In addition, you will learn about folium, a data visualization library that visualizes geospatial data. Furthermore, you will explore the process of creating maps using Folium and superimposing them with markers to make them interesting. Finally, you will learn how to create a Choropleth map using Folium.

Objectives
By the end of this week, you will be able to:

Explore waffle charts and word cloud along with their application

Describe Seaborn and explore the process of generating attractive regression plots

Describe Folium and explore the process of creating maps

Explore the process of superimposing markers on maps using Foilum

Describe Choropleth maps with the help of an illustration

Explore the process of creating a Choropleth map using Folium

Activities
Lesson 1: Advanced Visualizations and Geospatial Data

Waffle Charts & Word Cloud

Seaborn and Regression Plots

Hands-on Lab: Waffle Charts, Word Clouds, and Regression Plots

Practice Quiz: Advanced Visualization Tools

Lesson 2: Visualizing Geospatial Data

Introduction to Folium

Maps with Markers

Choropleth Maps

Hands-on Lab: Creating Maps and Visualizing Geospatial Data

Practice Quiz: Visualizing Geospatial Data

Module 3 Summary: Advanced Visualizations and Geospatial Data

Module 3 Cheat Sheet

Module 3 Graded Quiz: Advanced Visualizations and Geospatial Data


Module 4
Title: Creating Dashboards with Plotly and Dash
Description
Dashboards and interactive data applications are crucial tools for data visualization and analysis because they provide a consolidated view of key data and metrics in a visually appealing and understandable format. In this module, you will explore the benefits of dashboards and identify the different web-based dashboarding tools in Python. You will learn about Plotly and discover how to use Plotly graph objects and Plotly express to create charts. You will gain insight into Dash, an open-source user interface Python library, and its two components. Finally, you will gain a clear understanding of the callback function and determine how to connect core and HTML components using callback.

Objectives
By the end of this week, you will be able to:

Identify different web-based dashboarding tools available in Python

Explore Plotly and its two sub-modules

Use Plotly graph objects and Plotly express to create charts

Discover Dash and its two components

Describe the callback function

Determine the process of connecting core and HTML components using callback

Activities
Lesson 1: Creating Dashboards with Plotly and Dash

Dashboarding Overview

Additional Resources for Dashboards

Introduction to Plotly

Additional Resources for Plotly

Plotly Basics: Scatter, Line, Bar, Bubble, Histogram, Pie, Sunburst

Practice Quiz: Creating Dashboards with Plotly

Lesson 2: Working with Dash

Introduction to Dash

Overview of Cloud IDE lab environment

Dash Basics: HTML and Core Components

Additional Resources for Dash

Make Dashboards Interactive

Additional Resources for Interactive Dashboards

Add Interactivity: User Inputs and Callbacks

Understanding the Lab Environment

Flight Delay Time Statistics Dashboard

Practice Quiz: Working with Dash

Module 4 Summary: Creating Dashboards with Plotly and Dash

Module 4 Cheat Sheet

Module 4 Graded Quiz: Creating Dashboards with Plotly and Dash

Module 5
Title: Final Project and Exam
Description
The primary focus of this module is to practice the skills gained earlier in the course and then demonstrate those skills in your final assignment. For the final assignment you will analyze historical automobile sales data covering periods of recession and non-recession. You will bring your analysis to life using visualization techniques and then display the plots and graphs on dashboards. Finally, you will submit your assignment for peer review and you will review an assignment from one of your peers. To wrap up the course you will take a final exam in the form of a timed quiz.

Objectives
By the end of this week, you will be able to:

Practice visualization skills

Practice creating a dashboard

Create various visualizations using a number of plot libraries

Create a dashboard and add interactivity

Review and grade an assignment submitted by peers

Activities
Lesson 1: Practice Project

Practice Project Overview

Practice Assignment: Part 1 -  Analyzing wildfire data in Australia

Practice Assignment: Part 2 - Creating Dashboards

Lesson 2: Final Project

Final Project Overview

Final Assignment: Part 1 - Create Visualizations using Matplotlib, Seaborn & Folium

Final Assignment: Part 2 - Create Dashboard with Plotly and Dash

Final Assignment: Part 3 - Submission and Grading

 Final Exam: Data Visualization with Python - Timed Quiz

Lesson 3: Course Wrap Up

Course Summary

Congratulations and Next Steps

Thanks from the Course Team
