In this module, you will learn how to define the explanatory variable and the response variable and understand the differences between the simple linear regression and multiple linear regression models. You will learn how to evaluate a model using visualization and learn about polynomial regression and pipelines. You will also learn how to interpret and use the R-squared and the mean square error measures to perform in-sample evaluations to numerically evaluate our model. And lastly, you will learn about prediction and decision making when determining if our model is correct.

Learning Objectives

Describe how to process linear regression in Python
Apply model evaluation using visualization in Python
Apply polynomial regression techniques to Python
Evaluate a data model by using visualization
Describe the use of R-squared and MSE for in-sample evaluation
Apply prediction and decision making to Python model creation

Lesson Summary

In this lesson, you have learned how to:

Define the explanatory variable and the response variable: Define the response variable (y) as the focus of the experiment and the explanatory variable (x) as a variable used to explain the change of the response variable. Understand the differences between Simple Linear Regression because it concerns the study of only one explanatory variable and Multiple Linear Regression because it concerns the study of two or more explanatory variables.

Evaluate the model using Visualization: By visually representing the errors of a variable using scatterplots and interpreting the results of the model.

Identify alternative regression approaches: Use a Polynomial Regression when the Linear regression does not capture the curvilinear relationship between variables and how to pick the optimal order to use in a model.

Interpret the R-square and the Mean Square Error: Interpret R-square (x 100) as the percentage of the variation in the response variable y  that is explained by the variation in explanatory variable(s) x. The Mean Squared Error tells you how close a regression line is to a set of points. It does this by taking the average distances from the actual points to the predicted points and squaring them.